Add missing immutable areas to collections docs (#18186)
dotnet/docs: docs/standard/collections/when-to-use-generic-collections.md

The following generic types correspond to existing collection types:

- <xref:System.Collections.Generic.List%601> is the generic class that corresponds to <xref:System.Collections.ArrayList>.

- <xref:System.Collections.Generic.Dictionary%602> and <xref:System.Collections.Concurrent.ConcurrentDictionary%602> are the generic classes that correspond to <xref:System.Collections.Hashtable>.

- <xref:System.Collections.ObjectModel.Collection%601> is the generic class that corresponds to <xref:System.Collections.CollectionBase>. <xref:System.Collections.ObjectModel.Collection%601> can be used as a base class, but unlike <xref:System.Collections.CollectionBase>, it is not abstract, which makes it much easier to use.

- <xref:System.Collections.ObjectModel.ReadOnlyCollection%601> is the generic class that corresponds to <xref:System.Collections.ReadOnlyCollectionBase>. <xref:System.Collections.ObjectModel.ReadOnlyCollection%601> is not abstract and has a constructor that makes it easy to expose an existing <xref:System.Collections.Generic.List%601> as a read-only collection.

> - The <xref:System.Collections.Generic.Queue%601>, <xref:System.Collections.Concurrent.ConcurrentQueue%601>, <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableQueue%601>, <xref:System.Collections.Generic.Array%601>, <xref:System.Collections.Concurrent.ConcurrentArray%601>, <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableArray%601>, <xref:System.Collections.Generic.SortedList%602>, and <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedSet%601> generic classes correspond to the respective nongeneric classes with the same names.

Reviewer: I am not finding Generic.Array<T> or Concurrent.ConcurrentArray<T>. Are you sure those types exist?

Author: I have removed them

---
title: "When to Use Generic Collections"
ms.date: 04/30/2020
ms.technology: dotnet-standard
helpviewer_keywords: 
  - "collections [.NET Framework], generic"
  - "generic collections [.NET Framework]"
ms.assetid: e7b868b1-11fe-4ac5-bed3-de68aca47739
---

# When to use generic collections

Using generic collections gives you the automatic benefit of type safety without having to derive from a base collection type and implement type-specific members. Generic collection types also generally perform better than the corresponding nongeneric collection types (and better than types that are derived from nongeneric base collection types) when the collection elements are value types, because with generics, there's no need to box the elements.

> For programs that target .NET Standard 1.0 or later, use the generic collection classes in the <xref:System.Collections.Concurrent> namespace when multiple threads might be adding or removing items from the collection concurrently. Additionally, when immutability is desired, consider the generic collection classes <xref:System.Collections.Immutable>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For programs that target .NET Standard 1.0 or later, use the generic collection classes in the <xref:System.Collections.Concurrent> namespace when multiple threads might be adding or removing items from the collection concurrently. Additionally, when immutability is desired, consider the generic collection classes in the <xref:System.Collections.Immutable> namespace.
```

> For programs that target the .NET Standard 1.0 or later, you should use the generic collection classes in the <xref:System.Collections.Concurrent> namespace when multiple threads might be adding or removing items from the collection concurrently. Additionally, when immutability is desired consider the generic collection classes <xref:System.Collections.Immutable>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For programs that target .NET Standard 1.0 or later, use the generic collection classes in the <xref:System.Collections.Concurrent> namespace when multiple threads might be adding or removing items from the collection concurrently. Additionally, when immutability is desired, consider the generic collection classes <xref:System.Collections.Immutable>.
```

The following generic types correspond to existing collection types:

- <xref:System.Collections.Generic.List%601> is the generic class that corresponds to <xref:System.Collections.ArrayList>.

- <xref:System.Collections.Generic.Dictionary%602> and <xref:System.Collections.Concurrent.ConcurrentDictionary%602> are the generic classes that correspond to <xref:System.Collections.Hashtable>.

- <xref:System.Collections.ObjectModel.Collection%601> is the generic class that corresponds to <xref:System.Collections.CollectionBase>. <xref:System.Collections.ObjectModel.Collection%601> can be used as a base class, but unlike <xref:System.Collections.CollectionBase>, it is not abstract, which makes it much easier to use.

> - <xref:System.Collections.ObjectModel.ReadOnlyCollection%601> is the generic class that corresponds to <xref:System.Collections.ReadOnlyCollectionBase>. <xref:System.Collections.ObjectModel.ReadOnlyCollection%601> is not abstract, and has a constructor that makes it easy to expose an existing <xref:System.Collections.Generic.List%601> as a read-only collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- <xref:System.Collections.ObjectModel.ReadOnlyCollection%601> is the generic class that corresponds to <xref:System.Collections.ReadOnlyCollectionBase>. <xref:System.Collections.ObjectModel.ReadOnlyCollection%601> is not abstract and has a constructor that makes it easy to expose an existing <xref:System.Collections.Generic.List%601> as a read-only collection.
```

## Additional Types

Several generic collection types do not have nongeneric counterparts. They include the following:

- <xref:System.Collections.Generic.LinkedList%601> is a general-purpose linked list that provides O(1) insertion and removal operations.

- <xref:System.Collections.Generic.SortedDictionary%602> is a sorted dictionary with O(log `n`) insertion and retrieval operations, which makes it a useful alternative to <xref:System.Collections.Generic.SortedList%602>.

- <xref:System.Collections.ObjectModel.KeyedCollection%602> is a hybrid between a list and a dictionary, which provides a way to store objects that contain their own keys.

- <xref:System.Collections.Concurrent.BlockingCollection%601> implements a collection class with bounding and blocking functionality.

- <xref:System.Collections.Concurrent.ConcurrentBag%601> provides fast insertion and removal of unordered elements.

> ### Immutable Builders

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Immutable builders
```

> When considering immutability as a functional desire of application development, the <xref:System.Collections.Immutable> namespace offers generic collection types. All of the immutable collection types offer `Builders` as an optimization to performing numerous mutations. `Builders` work to batch operations in an unfrozen state. When all mutations have been completed on a `Builder` instance, call `ToImmutable` to freeze all nodes and create an `Immutable*<T>` generic collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you desire immutability functionality in your app, the <xref:System.Collections.Immutable> namespace offers generic collection types you can use. All of the immutable collection types offer `Builder` subclasses that can optimized performance when you're performing multiple mutations. The `Builder` class batches operations in a mutable state. When all mutations have been completed, call the `ToImmutable` method to "freeze" all nodes and create an immutable generic collection, for example, an <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableList%601>.
```

In looking at the preview for this page, I think there's probably too much duplication in the bullets that follow. I suggest listing all of the builder subclasses (is that the right term?) and then just describing the process of which methods to call for _one_ of those types.

Author: I agree and I'll update that tomorrow in a separate PR.

> When considering immutability as a functional desire of application development, the <xref:System.Collections.Immutable> namespace offers generic collection types. All of the immutable collection types offer `Builders` as an optimization to performing numerous mutations, which work to batch operations in an unfrozen state. When all mutations have been completed on a `Builder` instance call `ToImmutable` to freezes all nodes - thus resulting in an `Immutable*<T>` generic collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When considering immutability as a functional desire of application development, the <xref:System.Collections.Immutable> namespace offers generic collection types. All of the immutable collection types offer `Builders` as an optimization to performing numerous mutations. `Builders` work to batch operations in an unfrozen state. When all mutations have been completed on a `Builder` instance, call `ToImmutable` to freeze all nodes and create an `Immutable*<T>` generic collection.
```

Reviewer: Will "freeze" translate well here?

> - The <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableList%601.Builder> object can be created by calling the nongeneric <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableList.CreateBuilder%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> function. From an <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableList%601.Builder> instance, you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableList%601.Builder.ToImmutable%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType>. Likewise, from an <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableList%601> you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableList%601.ToBuilder?displayProperty=nameWithType> to create a builder instance from the generic immutable collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableList%601.Builder> object can be created by calling the nongeneric <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableList.CreateBuilder%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> function. From a <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableList%601.Builder> instance, you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableList%601.Builder.ToImmutable%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType>. Likewise, from an <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableList%601> you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableList%601.ToBuilder?displayProperty=nameWithType> to create a builder instance from the generic immutable collection.
```

> - The <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableArray%601.Builder> object can be created by calling the nongeneric <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableArray.CreateBuilder%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> function. From an <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableArray%601.Builder> instance, you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableArray%601.Builder.ToImmutable%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType>. Likewise, from an <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableArray%601> you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableArray%601.ToBuilder?displayProperty=nameWithType> to create a builder instance from the generic immutable collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableArray%601.Builder> object can be created by calling the nongeneric <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableArray.CreateBuilder%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> function. From a <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableArray%601.Builder> instance, you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableArray%601.Builder.ToImmutable%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType>. Likewise, from an <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableArray%601> you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableArray%601.ToBuilder?displayProperty=nameWithType> to create a builder instance from the generic immutable collection.
```

> - The <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableHashSet%601.Builder> object can be created by calling the nongeneric <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableHashSet.CreateBuilder%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> function. From an <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableHashSet%601.Builder> instance, you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableHashSet%601.Builder.ToImmutable%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType>. Likewise, from an <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableHashSet%601> you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableHashSet%601.ToBuilder?displayProperty=nameWithType> to create a builder instance from the generic immutable collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableHashSet%601.Builder> object can be created by calling the nongeneric <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableHashSet.CreateBuilder%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> function. From a <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableHashSet%601.Builder> instance, you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableHashSet%601.Builder.ToImmutable%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType>. Likewise, from an <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableHashSet%601> you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableHashSet%601.ToBuilder?displayProperty=nameWithType> to create a builder instance from the generic immutable collection.
```

> - The <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedSet%601.Builder> object can be created by calling the nongeneric <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedSet.CreateBuilder%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> function. From an <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedSet%601.Builder> instance, you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedSet%601.Builder.ToImmutable%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType>. Likewise, from an <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedSet%601> you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedSet%601.ToBuilder?displayProperty=nameWithType> to create a builder instance from the generic immutable collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedSet%601.Builder> object can be created by calling the nongeneric <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedSet.CreateBuilder%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> function. From a <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedSet%601.Builder> instance, you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedSet%601.Builder.ToImmutable%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType>. Likewise, from an <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedSet%601> you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedSet%601.ToBuilder?displayProperty=nameWithType> to create a builder instance from the generic immutable collection.
```

> - The <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableDictionary%602.Builder> object can be created by calling the nongeneric <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableDictionary.CreateBuilder%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> function. From an <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableDictionary%602.Builder> instance, you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableDictionary%602.Builder.ToImmutable%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType>. Likewise, from an <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableDictionary%602> you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableDictionary%602.ToBuilder?displayProperty=nameWithType> to create a builder instance from the generic immutable collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableDictionary%602.Builder> object can be created by calling the nongeneric <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableDictionary.CreateBuilder%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> function. From a <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableDictionary%602.Builder> instance, you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableDictionary%602.Builder.ToImmutable%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType>. Likewise, from an <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableDictionary%602> you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableDictionary%602.ToBuilder?displayProperty=nameWithType> to create a builder instance from the generic immutable collection.
```

> - The <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedDictionary%602.Builder> object can be created by calling the nongeneric <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedDictionary.CreateBuilder%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> function. From an <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedDictionary%602.Builder> instance, you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedDictionary%602.Builder.ToImmutable%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType>. Likewise, from an <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedDictionary%602> you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedDictionary%602.ToBuilder?displayProperty=nameWithType> to create a builder instance from the generic immutable collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedDictionary%602.Builder> object can be created by calling the nongeneric <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedDictionary.CreateBuilder%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> function. From a <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedDictionary%602.Builder> instance, you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedDictionary%602.Builder.ToImmutable%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType>. Likewise, from an <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedDictionary%602> you can call <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableSortedDictionary%602.ToBuilder?displayProperty=nameWithType> to create a builder instance from the generic immutable collection.
```

### Immutable builders

> When you desire immutability functionality in your app, the <xref:System.Collections.Immutable> namespace offers generic collection types you can use. All of the immutable collection types offer `Builder` subclasses that can optimized performance when you're performing multiple mutations. The `Builder` class batches operations in a mutable state. When all mutations have been completed, call the `ToImmutable` method to "freeze" all nodes and create an immutable generic collection, for example, an <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableList%601>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you desire immutability functionality in your app, the <xref:System.Collections.Immutable> namespace offers generic collection types you can use. All of the immutable collection types offer `Builder` subclasses that can optimize performance when you're performing multiple mutations. The `Builder` class batches operations in a mutable state. When all mutations have been completed, call the `ToImmutable` method to "freeze" all nodes and create an immutable generic collection, for example, an <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableList%601>.
```

When you desire immutability functionality in your app, the <xref:System.Collections.Immutable> namespace offers generic collection types you can use. All of the immutable collection types offer `Builder` subclasses that can optimized performance when you're performing multiple mutations. The `Builder` class batches operations in a mutable state. When all mutations have been completed, call the `ToImmutable` method to "freeze" all nodes and create an immutable generic collection, for example, an <xref:System.Collections.Immutable.ImmutableList%601>.

> The `Builder` object can be created by calling the nongeneric `CreateBuilder()` function. From a `Builder` instance, you can call `ToImmutable()`. Likewise, from the `Immutable*` collection you can call `ToBuilder()` to create a builder instance from the generic immutable collection. Below are the various builder types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Builder` object can be created by calling the nongeneric `CreateBuilder()` method. From a `Builder` instance, you can call `ToImmutable()`. Likewise, from the `Immutable*` collection, you can call `ToBuilder()` to create a builder instance from the generic immutable collection. The following are the various `Builder` types.
```

Reviewer: We shouldn't use "above" or "below" because we can't predict the actual layout.
